1060 – FOOTPRINTS WITHOUT FEET
Textbook  for  Class  X
First  Edition
April  2007    Chaitra 1929
Reprinted
October  2007,  January  2009,
January  2010,  November  2010,
January  2012,  March  2013,
February  2014,  December  2014,
December  2015,  December  2016,
December  2017,  December  2018,
August  2019,  January  2021  and
November  2021
Revised  Edition
December  2022  Agrahayana  1944
PD 460T BS
©  National  Council  of  Educational
Research and Training, 2007, 2022
`  50.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT  watermark
Published  at  the  Publication
Division  by  the  Secretary,  National
Council of Educational Research and
Training,  Sri  Aurobindo  Marg,
New  Delhi  110  016  and  printed
at  LPP  Print  Packeging  Pvt.  Ltd.,
28/1/10,  Site-IV,  Sahibabad
Industrial Area, Sahibabad, District
Ghaziabad  (U.P.)
FFFFForeword
oreword
oreword
oreword
oreword
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends
that children's life at school must be linked to their life outside
the school. This principle marks a departure from the legacy of
bookish learning which continues to shape our system and
causes a gap between the school, home and community. The
syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an
attempt  to  implement  this  basic  idea.  They  also  attempt  to
discourage  rote  learning  and  the  maintenance  of  sharp
boundaries  between  different  subject  areas.  We  hope  these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a
child-centred system of education outlined  in the National Policy
of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect
on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and
questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom,
children  generate  new  knowledge  by  engaging  with  the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed
textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons
why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating
creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children
as  participants  in  learning,  not  as  receivers  of  a  fixed  body
of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines
and mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as
necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so
that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted
to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will
also  determine  how  effective  this  book  proves  for  making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source
of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address
the  problem  of  curricular  burden  by  restructuring  and
reorienting  knowledge  at  different  stages  with  greater
consideration for child psychology and the time available for
teaching. The supplementary reader attempts to enhance this
endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities
for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups,
and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT)  appreciates  the  hard  work  done  by  the  textbook
development committee responsible for this book. We wish to
thank  the  Chairperson  of  the  advisory  committee
for  textbooks  in  languages  for  the  secondary  stage,
Professor Namwar Singh, and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor R. Amritavalli  for guiding the work of this committee.
Several  teachers  contributed  to  the  development  of  this
supplementary reader; we are grateful to their principals for
making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their resources, materials and personnel.  We are especially
grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee,
appointed  by  the  Department  of  Secondary  and  Higher
Education,  Ministry  of  Human  Resource  Development
under  the  Chairpersonship  of  Professor  Mrinal  Miri  and
Professor  G.P.  Deshpande  for  their  valuable  time  and
contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform
and continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable
us to undertake further revision and refinements.
New Delhi
20  November  2006
Rationalisation  of  Content  in  the  T
Rationalisation  of  Content  in  the  T
extbooks
extbooks
Rationalisation  of  Content  in  the  Textbooks
extbooks
Rationalisation  of  Content  in  the  T
Rationalisation  of  Content  in  the  T
extbooks
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on
students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the
content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset.  In  this  background,  the  NCERT  has  undertaken  the  exercise  to
rationalise  the  textbooks  across  all  classes.  Learning  Outcomes  already
developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in
this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
• Content based on genres of literature in the textbooks and supplementary
readers at different stages of school education.
• Content that is meant for achieving Learning Outcomes for developing
language proficiency and is accessible at different stages.
• For reducing the curriculum load and examination stress in view of the
previling condition of the Pandemic.
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or
peer-learning.
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context.
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.
A  Note  to  the  T
A  Note  to  the  T
eacher
eacher
A  Note  to  the  Teacher
eacher
A  Note  to  the  T
A  Note  to  the  T
eacher
Footprints without Feet, a supplementary reader in English for
Class X, is based on the new syllabus prepared as a follow-up to
the  National  Curriculum  Framework,  2005.  The  curriculum
envisages  language  learning  opportunities  that  are  rich  in
comprehensible  input,  and  adopts  a  language-across-the-
curriculum, multilingual perspective on English in the school.
Input-rich  communicational  environments  are  a  prerequisite
for language learning. Therefore, learners must be exposed to a
variety of texts.
The supplementary reader is meant for students to read on
their own; it aims at developing their reading skills. Learners
need  to  develop  the  habit  of  reading  for  information  and
pleasure, drawing inferences from what they read, and relating
texts  to  their  previous  knowledge.  They  need  to  learn  to
read  critically  and  to  develop  the  confidence  to  ask  and
answer questions.
The  selections  in  the  supplementary  reader  take  into
account  the  interests  of  young  learners  while  making  them
aware  of  issues  that  they  need  to  reflect  on:  personal
relationships, the neighbourhood, and the community. Thematic
variety has been taken care of and there is a good representation
of a variety of genres as well as of writers from across the world—
Indian,  British,  French,  American  and  Japanese.  This
supplementary reader has ten pieces including a play and a
factual prose piece, as well as science fiction.
Each piece begins with questions under the head ‘Read and
Find Out’ to guide learners in their reading and comprehension
of the text, which is divided into two to three sections, each
section  prefaced  with  relevant  questions.  Thus  the  texts  do
not need to be read out or explained by the teacher in class.
Word glosses have similarly been kept to the minimum so as
to  encourage  inferences  about  meaning  from  sentential
and  discourse  contexts.  The  teacher,  after  a  quick  oral
comprehension check, if necessary, can progress to the questions
under the head ‘Think About It’ at the end of each unit. These
are meant to take the learner beyond factual comprehension to
contemplate on the issues that the texts raise; the questions are
open ended and thought provoking.
The questions given under ‘Talk About It’ are intended to
encourage the learners to express their own ideas in a creative
and  coherent  way.  It  is  hoped  that  the  topics  suggested  for
discussion will encourage learners to develop a constructive
analysis  of  the  relevant  issues,  involving  critical  thinking,
reasoning, and previous knowledge as well as new knowledge.
The list of suggested readings given at the end of each story
is meant to encourage learners to read further on their own.
The idea is to promote the habit of self-learning and reduce
dependence on the teacher.
Language learning is essentially a matter of acquiring in an
integrated way the skills of listening, speaking, reading and
writing; and of honing these skills for effective communication
in  the  classroom,  and  later  in  real  life.  This  book  offers  an
opportunity for taking learners in that direction.
TTTTTextbook  Development  Committee
extbook  Development  Committee
extbook  Development  Committee
extbook  Development  Committee
extbook  Development  Committee
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE  FOR TEXTBOOKS  IN
LANGUAGES  FOR  THE  SECONDARY  STAGE
Professor  Namwar  Singh,  formerly  Chairman,  School  of
Languages, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
CHIEF ADVISOR
R.  Amritavalli,  Professor,  English  and  Foreign  Languages
University (EFLU), Hyderabad
CHIEF  COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Former Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Kalyani  Samantray, Reader in English, S B W  College, Cuttak,
Odisha
Lakshmi  Rawat,  TGT  (English),  BRD  Sarvodaya  Kanya
Vidyalaya, Prasad Nagar, Karol Bagh, New Delhi
Nasiruddin Khan, Former Reader in English, Department of
Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi
Padmini Baruah, Associate Professor in English, Department
of ELT, Guwahati University, Guwahati, Assam
R. Meganathan, Assistant Professor in English, Department of
Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi
Sadhana Agarwal, TGT (English), Rajkiya Pratibha Vidyalaya,
Link Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi
Sadhana Parashar, Education Officer (ELT), CBSE, Community
Centre, Preet Vihar, Delhi
Sandhya  Sahoo,  Professor  in  English,  Regional  Institute  of
Education, Bhubaneswar
Shruti Sircar, Associate Professor in English, Centre for ESL
Studies, EFLU, Hyberabad
MEMBER– COORDINATOR
Kirti Kapur, Professor of English, Department of Education in
Languages, NCERT, New Delhi
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
The National Council of Educational Research and Training is
grateful  to  Professor  M.L.Tickoo,  formerly  of  the  CIEFL,
Hyderabad, and the Regional Language Centre, Singapore for
his  valuable  suggestions  and  advice  in  the  development  of
this book.
For permission to use copyright material, NCERT would like
to thank Scott, Foreman and Company, Glenview, Illinois for
the pieces ‘The Making of a Scientist’ by Robert W. Peterson and
‘The Book that Saved the Earth’ by Claire Boiko. Special thanks
are due to Professor Yash Pal and Dr Rahul Pal from whose
Discovered  Questions  (NCERT,  2006)  we  have  taken  three
questions along with their answers.
We  also  thank  the  Publication  Department,  NCERT,  for
their  support.  We  gratefully  acknowledge  the  services  of
Parash Ram Kaushik, Incharge, Computer Resource Centre,
NCERT;  Razi  Ahmad  and  Arvind  Sharma,  DTP  Operators;
G.C. Chandrakar, Copy Editor; and Mathew John, Proof Reader.
The Council is grateful to the review committee constituted by
the Curriculum Group for the rationalisation of this edition in which
the representatives of CBSE and the member of faculty of English
from the Department of Education in Language participated.
Foreword
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks
A Note to the Teacher
1. A  Triumph  of  Surgery
JAMES HERRIOT
2. The  Thief’s  Story
RUSKIN BOND
3. The  Midnight  Visitor
ROBERT ARTHUR
4. A  Question  of  Trust
VICTOR CANNING
5. Footprints  without  Feet
H.G. WELLS
6. The  Making  of  a  Scientist
ROBERT W. PETERSON
7. The  Necklace
GUY DE MAUPASSANT
8. Bholi
K.A. ABBAS
9. The Book That Saved the Earth
CLAIRE BOIKO
Constitution of India
Fundamental  Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his  child  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  ward  between  the  age  of  six  and
fourteen  years.
Note: The Article  51A  containing  Fundamental  Duties  was  inserted  by  the  Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).
