Chapter: Super senses
In the playground, an eagle flew down and took away your roti. You dropped something sweet on the ground and within minutes many ants collected around it. As you walked softly past a sleeping dog, its ears shot up at once. Why does it happen? Think and tellAnimals also have different senses. They can see, hear,taste, smell and feel. Some animals can see their prey from far away. Some can hear even the faintest sound. Someanimals can find their friends by their smell. The animalworld is full of examples of amazing senses!How did the ant recognise a friend? An ant was going along on the ground. It saw a groupof ants coming from the other side. The first ant quickly came back to its hole. The ant guarding the holerecognised it and let it in. Think and TellHow did the ant know that the other ants were not from its group? How did the guard ant recognise this ant? Try this and writeDrop some sugar, jaggery or anything sweet on the ground. Wait until the ants come there. How long did it take for the ants to come? Did one ant come first or a group of ants came together? What did the ants do with the food? Where do they go from there? Do they move in a line? Teacher’s Note : Children of this age are interested in animals. Encourage themto share their experiences. Children should be supported to carry out observationactivities which require patience. Now carefully, without harming the ants, block their path for a while with a pencil. Now observe, how do the ants move? Many years ago a scientist did many experiments like this. He found out that as the ants move, they leave a smell on theground. The other ants follow the smell to find the way. w Now can you guess why the ants behavedlike that when you blocked their path? Some male insects can recognise theirfemales by their smell. w Have you ever been troubled by mosquitoes? Just think, how do they know whereyou are? Mosquitoes can find you by the smell of yourbody. They also find you by the smell of thesole of your feet and the heat of your body. I am a silk worm. Ican find my femaleworm from manykilometres away byher smell. w Have you seen a dog sniffing hereand there? What do you think it istrying to smell? Dogs mark out their own area onthe road. They can make out if anotherdog has come into their area by thesmell of its urine or potty (latrine). Write In what ways do human beings make use of this special sense of smell of dogs? When do you find your sense of smell helpful to you? List some examples. Like – to know by its smell that food has gone bad or that something is burning. Name the animals that you would be able to recognise only by their smell, without seeing them? Write the names of five things whose smell you like and five things whose smell you do not like. Do you and your friends have similar answers? DiscussDo the clothes of any of your family members smell? whose? Did you ever come across any smell in a crowded place such as a fair, bus, train etc. Why so? Today Rajni had to go out for someimportant work. She had to leave her sixmonth old son Deepak with her sisterSushila. Sushila also has a baby ofthe same age. It was funny that boththe babies did potty at the sametime. She happily cleaned herdaughter but when she was cleaningher sister’s son Deepak, she coveredher nose with her dupatta (scarf). Think and discussSushila covered her nose when she cleaned Deepak’s nappy, but not when she cleaned her daughter. Why do you think she did this? How do you feel when you walk near a heap of garbage? Think of the children who spend the whole day picking things from such garbage. Is a smell ‘good’ or ‘bad’ for everyone in the same way? Or does it depend on how each one feels about it? Teacher’s Note : Sushila’s example illustrates a common situation in families. Discuss with children how we often find a smell ‘bad’ when we think it isfrom something dirty. If we analyse it, we may not be so offended by certain smells. Let’s seeWrite the name of a bird which has eyes in front of its head(like in humans). Write the names of some birds which have eyes on either side of the head. What is the size of their eyes as compared to the size of their head? Most of the birds have their eyes on either side of the head. Their eyes can focus on two different things at a time. When theylook straight ahead, both their eyes focus on the same object. You must have seen birds moving their neck very often. Doyou know why? In most of the birds, eyes are fixed and cannotmove. So birds have to turn their heads to see around. Looking with one or both eyesClose your right eye or cover it with your hand. Tell yourfriend to stand to your right, at some distance, and ask himto do some action (wave hand, shake head, etc. )w Could you see your friend’s action, without moving your neck? w Now try to look at your friend’s action with both your eyesopen but without moving your neck. w What was the difference on looking with one or both eyes? Teacher’s Note : When a bird focuses both eyes on an object, it can estimate thedistance. When its eyes focus on two different things, it increases its range ofvision. Children will understand this better, once they start observing the locationof eyes of different birds. While seeing with one eye and then with two eyes, childrenwill understand how with two eyes, the span of vision increases. Now toss a small ball or a coin and try to catch it. Try this with both your eyes open. Then close one eye and try to catch it. When was it easier to catch? Imagine how it would be to have your eyes in place of your ears? What would you be able to do then, which you cannot do now? Some birds like kites, eagles, vultures can see four timesas far as we can. These birds can see things from a distanceof eight metres what we can see from a distance of two metres. Now can you guess from what distance can an eagle in the sky can see a roti on the ground? Do animals see colours? Animals cannot see as many colours as we can. See how things in these pictures will be seen by some animals. It is believed that animals that are awake in the daytime can see some colours. Those animals that are awake at night can see things only in black and white colours. In Class IV, you read that we cannot easily see birds’ ears. Their earsare small holes covered with feathers. WriteThe names of ten animals whose ears can be seen. The names of some animals whose ears are bigger than our ears. Think Is there some link between the size of animals’ ears and their hearing? Try thisFor this activity find a quiet place in your school. Tell one of your friends to stand at a shortdistance and ask him to say something softly. The rest of you should listen carefully. Then allof you put your hands behind your ears, asshown in the picture. Let the same child saysomething again as softly as before. In whichcase was the sound sharper? Ask your friendstoo. Put your hands over your ears and saysomething. Can you hear your own voice? Sit near a desk. Tap the desk once withyour hand. Listen carefully. Now put yourear on the desk as shown in the picture. Tap on the desk once again with your hand. Listen again. Was there any difference inthe sound of the tap? This is how snakes hear. They do not have external ears(which you can see). They only feel the vibrations on the ground. Sounds send messagesw High up on a tree, a langur warns others of dangers like a tiger or leopard. The langurdoes this by making a special warning call. Birds also give alarm calls to warn aboutthe danger. Some birds even have different sounds for different kinds of dangers. Forexample, there is a different warning call if the enemy is coming from the sky or ifthe enemy is on the ground. w Fishes give alarm call by electric signals. Some animals start behaving in a different way when anearthquake or storm is about to come. People who live inforests and can observe such behaviour of animals come toknow of the danger. In December 2004, few tribes that live in the forests ofthe Andaman Islands noticed the animals behaving in adifferent manner. They guessed some danger. So theymoved away to a safer part of the island. Soon after, theislands were hit by the tsunami but these people weresaved. Dolphins also make differentsounds to give messages toeach other. Scientists believethat many animals have aspecial language of their own. Write Can you understand the sounds of some animals? Which animals? Do some animals understand your language? Which ones? Say it with soundsJust like birds and dolphins you can also make your ownlanguage of sounds for giving messages. Remember you haveto talk to your friends with only sounds and no words. Howand when will you need to give an alarm call? For example,when the teacher is coming to the classroom!Sleeping-wakingSome animals go into a long, deep sleep in certain seasons. Then they are not seen for many months. Have you noticed that during the cold season you cannot see any lizard in the house? Where do you think theyhave gone? Teacher’s Note : The lesson gives examples of several animals with ‘sensitive’senses. Encourage children to find out more such animal senses from newspapers,TV programmes, etc. Sloth It looks like a bear but is not. It is a sloth. It spends almost 17 hours a day sleeping whilehanging upside down on a tree branch. The slotheats the leaves of the same tree on which it lives. It hardly needs anything else. When it has eatenenough leaves from that tree, it moves to thenearby tree. Sloths live for about 40 years and in that timethey move around only eight trees. Once a weekit comes down from the tree to relieve itself. 24 Hours24 HoursTime for whichsloth is awake18 Hours6 Hours18 Hours6 HoursSleeping time for sloth12 Hours12 HoursIf you were to show a sloth’s daily routine(sleeping and waking) in a 24-hour clock, thisis what the clock would look like. How will you show the clockfor a house-lizard in winters? When you see different animals, do you have any questions aboutthem? Make a list of ten such questions. Teacher’s Note : The sleeping and waking routine of animals is given in a 24 hourclock to encourage children to think about fractions (one-third, one-fourth, etc. )Explain phrases like ‘call of nature’, ‘relieve itself ’ etc. A tiger can see sixtimes better atnight than most ofus. The tiger’s whiskersare very sensitiveand can sense themovements orvibrations in air. They help the tigermove in the darkand find its prey. A tiger’s sense of hearingis so sharp that it canmake out the differencebetween the rustling ofleaves and the sound ofan animal moving on thegrass. The ears of the tigercan move in differentdirections and this helpsto catch the sounds fromall around. Tigers make differentsounds for differentpurposes like when it isangry or to call out to atigress. It can also roar orsnarl. It’s roar can be12heard upto 3 kilometresaway. Each tiger has its own areawhich may cover severalkilometres. T igers marktheir area with their urine. A tiger can at once cometo know if there is anothertiger in its area by theLooking Aroundsmell of the urine. A tigerwill avoid going intoanother tiger’s area. The tiger is one of the most alert animals. And yet, todaytigers are in danger. What do you think are some of the dangers to tigers in the jungle? Can human beings also be a threat to animals? How? Do you know that today many animals are killed and theirparts are sold? Elephants are killed for their tusks, rhinocerosfor its horn, tigers, crocodiles and snakes for their skins. Musk deer are killed just to make a little scent from its musk. People who kill animals are called hunters and poachers. The number of tigers and many other animals in our country is reducing. There is a danger that some of them will soon disappear. To protect theanimals, our government has made some forests as protected areas. Someof them are the Jim Corbett National Park in Uttrakhand and ‘Ghana’ inBharatpur district of Rajasthan. In these areas nobody can hunt animalsor destroy the jungle. Find outWhere are other such National Parks in India? Collect information on these and write a report. What we have learntHave you noticed that sometimes singers puttheir hand on their ear when they sing? Why do you think they may be doing this? Give examples of animals that may have a very strongsense of sight, hearing or smell. Teacher’s Note : Discuss with children the various threats to the tiger – poaching,destruction of forests for roads, dams, human settlements, forest fires, etc. 13Super SensesRationalised 2023-24. Let’s make a paper dogFor this you need: thick paper, pencil, scissors,sketch pen. Paper StripBow, Wow!Give your doga name!Cut a long strip of thick paper. Mark the strip asshown here. Make small cuts on the lines marked 1 to 6. Hook together the cuts on the number 1 and 2 (seepicture a). In the same way, hook together 3 in 4, and 5 in 6 (seepicture b and c)Make a cut in the mark on the leg (see picture c). Turn down the corners of the strip on top of the head,to make the ears (picture d)6Mark the eyes and nose with a sketch pen. Wasn’t that fun!