India and the Contemporary World – II
Textbook in History for Class X
1066  –  INDIA  AND  THE  CONTEMPORARY  WORLD  –  II
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published  at  the  Publication  Division  by
the  Secretary,  National  Council  of
Educational  Research  and  Training,  Sri
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed  at Swapna Printing Works (P.) Ltd.,
Doltala,  Doharia,  P.O.  Ganganagar,
District 
-  North,  24  Parganas,
Kolkota - 700 132
Foreword
The  National  Curriculum  Framework  (NCF)  2005  recommends  that  children’s  life
at  school  must  be  linked  to  their  life  outside  the  school.  This  principle  marks  a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks
developed  on  the  basis  of  NCF  signify  an  attempt  to  implement  this  basic  idea.
They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries
between  different  subject  areas.  We  hope  these  measures  will  take  us  significantly
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National
Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers
will  take  to  encourage  children  to  reflect  on  their  own  learning  and  to  pursue
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed
on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination
is  one  of  the  key  reasons  why  other  resources  and  sites  of  learning  are  ignored.
Inculcating  creativity  and  initiative  is  possible  if  we  perceive  and  treat  children  as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar
so that the required number of  teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods
used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves
for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of  stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by
restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for
child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation
and  wondering,  discussion  in  small  groups,  and  activities  requiring  hands-on
experience.
NCERT  appreciates  the  hard  work  done  by  the  textbook  development  committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the Advisory Group
on  Social  Science,  Professor  Hari  Vasudevan  and  the  Chief  Advisor  for  this  book,
Professor  Neeladri  Bhattacharya  for  guiding  the    work  of  this  committee.  Several
teachers  contributed  to  the  development  of  this  textbook;  we  are  grateful  to  their
principals  for  making  this  possible.  We  are  indebted  to  the  institutions  and
organisations  which  have  generously  permitted  us  to  draw  upon  their  resources,
material  and  personnel.  We  are  especially  grateful  to  the  members  of  the  National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education,  Ministry  of  Human  Resource  Development  under  the
Chairpersonship  of  Professor  Mrinal  Miri  and  Professor  G.  P.  Deshpande,  for
their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic
reform  and  continuous  improvement  in  the  quality  of  its  products,  NCERT
welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision  and  refinement.
New  Delhi
20  November  2006
iv
Textbook  Development  Committee
CHAIRPERSON,  ADVISORY  COMMITTEE  FOR  TEXTBOOKS  IN  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  FOR
THE  SECONDARY  STAGE
Hari  Vasudevan,  Professor,  Department  of  History,  Calcutta  University,  Kolkata
CHIEF  ADVISOR
Neeladri  Bhattacharya,  Professor,  Centre  for  Historical  Studies,  School  of  Social
Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Members
Brij Tankha, Professor, Department of  East Asian Studies, University of  Delhi
G. Balachandran, Professor, Graduate Institute of  International Studies, Geneva
Janaki Nair, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata
Monica Juneja, Professor, Maria-Goeppert-Mayer Guest Professor, Historisches Seminar,
University of  Hanover, Germany
P.K. Dutta, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata
Rashmi Paliwal, Eklavya, Hoshangabad
Rekha Krishnan, Head of  Senior School, Vasant Valley School, New Delhi
Sekhar  Bandyopadhyay,    Professor,  Faculty  of  Humanities  and  Social  Sciences,
Victoria University of  Wellington, New Zealand
Shukla Sanyal, Reader, Department of History, Calcutta University, Kolkata
Tanika  Sarkar,  Professor,  Centre  for  Historical  Studies,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University,
New Delhi
Udaya Kumar, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Kiran  Devendra,  Professor,  Department  of  Elementary  Education,  NCERT,
New  Delhi
Acknowledgements
This book is the result of a collective effort of a large number of historians, teachers and
educationists. Each chapter has been written, discussed and revised over many months. We
would like to acknowledge all those who have participated in these discussions.
A  large  number  of  people  have  read  chapters  of  the  book  and  provided  support.  We
thank in particular the members of the Monitoring Committee who commented on an
earlier draft ; Kumkum Roy suggested many changes in the text; G. Arunima, Gautam
Bhadra,  Supriya  Chaudhuri,  Jayanti  Chattopadhyay,    Sangeetha  Raj,  Sambuddha  Sen,
Lakshmi Subramaniam, A.R. Venkatachalapathy, T.R. Ramesh Bairy, C.S. Venkiteswaran
and Sahana  helped with Chapter VIII. Purushottam Agarwal helped write the sections
on the Hindi novel.  Ngun Quoc Anh translated Vietnamese texts for Chapter III.
Illustrating the book would have been impossible without the help of many institutions
and  individuals:  the  Library  of  Congress  Prints  and  Photographs  Division;  Rabindra
Bhawan  Photo  Archives,  Viswabharati  University,  Shantiniketan;  Photo  Archives,
American  Embassy,  New  Delhi;    Indira  Gandhi  National  Centre  for  the  Arts,
New Delhi ; National  Manuscript Mission Library,  New Delhi ; Centre for Studies in
Social  Sciences,  Kolkata;  Ashutosh  Collection  of  the  National  Library,  Kolkata;
Roja  Muthaiah  Research  Library  Trust,  Chennai;  India  Collection,  India  International
Centre; Archives of Indian Labour, V.V. Giri National Institute of Labour, New Delhi;
Photo  Archives,  University  of  West  Indies,  Trinidad.  Jyotindra  and  Juta  Jain  allowed
generous access to their vast collection of visual images now stored at the CIVIC Archives;
Parthiv  Shah  provided  several  photographs  from  his  collection.  Prabhu  Mohapatra
supplied  visuals  of  indentured  labourers;    Muzaffar  Alam  procured  material  from  the
Library  of  Chicago;  Pratik  Chakrabarty  scanned  images  from  the  Kent  University
Library;  Anish  Vanaik  and  Parth  Shil  did  photo  research  in  New  Delhi.
Shalini  Advani  did  many  rounds  of  editing  with  care  and  ensured  that  the  texts  were
accessible to children. Shyama Warner’s sharp eye picked up innumerable slips and lapses
in the text. We thank them both for their total involvement in the project.
We have made every effort to acknowledge credits , but we apologise in advance for any
omission that may have inadvertently taken place.
Credits
  Photographs  and  pictures
We would like to acknowledge the following:
Institutions and Photo Archives
Archives of  Indian Labour, V.V. Giri National Institute of  Labour (IV: 18, 19)
Ashutosh Collection of  the National Library, Kolkata
Collection Jyotindra  and Juta Jain, Civic Archives (II: 11, 13, 14; IV: 25, 26a,
26b, 27; V: 17)
Cultural Heritage Administration (CHA), Cheongju Early Printing Museum, Republic of Korea
(V: 2b, 4b)
Library of  Congress Prints and Photography Division (III: 20; V: 40)
Manuscript Mission Collection (V: 14, 15, 16)
Photo Archive, American Library, New Delhi (III: 21, 23)
Photo Archives, University of  West Indies, Trinidad (III: 14, 15, 16)
Publications Division, Ministry of  Information and Broadcasting (images for
Chapter II photographs)
Roja Muthaiah Research Library Trust, Chennai
Journals
The Illustrated London News (III: 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13; IV: 4, 5, 6, 8, 12)
Illustrated Times (IV: 12)
Indian Charivari (V: 18)
Graphic: (III: 13)
Books
Breman, Jan and Parthiv Shah, Working the Mill No More (IV: 21)
Chaudhuri, K.N., Trade and Civilization in the Indian Ocean (map in Chapter III)
Dwivedi, Sharda and Rahul Mehrotra, Bombay: The City Within (II: 1)
Goswami, B.N., The Word is Sacred; Sacred is the Word (V: 14, 15, 16)
Ruhe, Peter, Gandhi (II: 2, 3, 5, 8)
Introduction
We live in a world where the existence of nations is taken for granted. We see people as
belonging to nations and having a nationality, and we assume that this sense of belonging
has existed from time immemorial. We consider countries as the same as nations, and use
the two terms as synonyms, making little distinction between them. We think of countries
as unified entities, each with a demarcated international boundary, a defined territory, a
national language, and a central government.
Yet if  we were to travel in a time capsule to the mid-eighteenth century and look for nations
as we know them today, we would not find them. If  we were to ask people about their
nationality, about their national identity, they would not understand our questions. For at that
time, nations did not exist in their modern form. People lived within kingdoms, small states,
principalities, chiefdoms and duchies, not within nations. As Eric Hobsbawm, a famous historian,
once said, the most remarkable fact about the modern nation is its modernity. The history of
its existence is no more than 250 years old.
How did the modern nation come into being? How did people begin to see themselves as
belonging to a nation?
The sense of belonging to a nation developed only over a period of time. The first two
chapters (in Section I) of  this book will trace this history. You will see how the idea of  nationalism
emerged in Europe, how territories were unified, and national governments formed. It was a
process that took many decades, involved many wars and revolutions, many ideological battles
and political conflicts. From a discussion of  Europe (Chapter I) we will shift our focus to the
growth of nationalism in India (Chapter II), where nationalism was shaped by the experience
of colonialism and the anti-imperialist movement. It will help you understand how nationalism
in colonial countries can develop in a variety  of ways, glorify contrasting ideals, and be  linked
to different modes of  struggle.
The story of  nationalism in these chapters will move at several levels. You will of  course read
about great leaders like Giuseppe Mazzini and Mahatma Gandhi. But we cannot understand
nationalism only by knowing about the words and deeds of important leaders, and the big
and dramatic events they led and participated in. We have to also look at the aspirations and
activities of ordinary people, see how nationalism is expressed in small events of everyday life,
and shaped by a variety of  seemingly dissimilar and unrelated social movements.  To understand
how nationalism spreads, we need to know not only what the leaders said, but also how their
words were understood and interpreted by people. If we are to think about how people
begin to identify with a nation, we must see not only the political events that are critical to the
process, but also how nationalist sensibilities are nurtured by artists and writers, and through
art and literature, songs and tales.
In Section II, we will shift our focus to economies and livelihoods. Last year you read about
those social groups — pastoralists and forest dwellers — who are often seen as survivors
from past times when in fact they are very much part of the modern world we live in. This
year we will focus on developments that are seen as symbolising modernity – globalisation
and  industrialisation –  and see the many sides of  the history of  these developments.
In Chapter III you will see how the global world has emerged out of a long and complicated
history. From ancient times, pilgrims, traders, travelers have traversed distances, carrying goods,
information and skills, linking societies in ways that often had contradictory consequences.
Items of food and species of plants spread from one region to another, transferring
information and taste, as well as disease and death. As Western powers carried the flag of
‘civilisation’ deep into different parts of Africa, precious metals and slaves were taken
away to Europe and America. When coffee and sugar were grown in the Caribbean
plantations for the world market, an oppressive system of indentured labour came into
being in India and China to supply workers for the plantations.
Section III will introduce you to the history of print culture. Surrounded by things that
appear in print, we might find it difficult today to imagine a time when printing was still
unknown. Chapter V will trace how the history of the contemporary world is intimately
connected with the growth of  print. You will see how printing made possible the spread
of  information and ideas, debates and discussions, advertising and propaganda, and a
variety of  new forms of  literature.
When we discuss such themes of everyday life, we begin to see how history can help us
reflect on even the seemingly ordinary things in the world.
x
Contents
Foreword
Introduction
Section  I:  Events  and  Processes
I. The  Rise  of  Nationalism  in  Europe
II. Nationalism  in  India
Section  III:  Everyday  Life,  Culture  and  Politics
V. Print Culture and the Modern World
You may  access the following chapters through QR Code :
♦
♦
♦
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China.
Work, Life and Leisure.
Novels, Society and History
These chapters were printed in the previous textbooks; the same
are being provided in digital mode for extended learning.
